I would first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on holding a debate on a subject that is so central to the United Nations peace mission. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his introductory remarks and to pay tribute to his personal commitment to strengthening the rule of law in the service of the values of peace and justice. Finally, I welcome the participation of the President of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and of the representative of the Office of the ICC Prosecutor, whom we thank for their briefings.Maintaining and strengthening peace, achieving sustainable development and promoting human rights are at the heart of the mission of the United Nations. In our common quest for a multilateral response to these fundamental and complex issues, we remain thoroughly convinced of their universality and indivisibility. Nevertheless, faced with the complexity of conflict and post-conflict situations, it is difficult if not delusional to attempt to offer societies affected by conflict prefabricated solutions to finding peace again and satisfying their desire for justice.Strategies and measures aimed at redressing flagrant violations of human rights and international humanitarian law must take into account the specific context of every situation in order to prevent the recurrence of crises, ensure social cohesion and promote national reconciliation. Experience has shown that only holistic approaches that address realities and are owned by the populations concerned can ensure sustainable peace. Peace and stability are sustainably maintained if the structural causes of the conflict are investigated and then dealt with by, inter alia, the establishment of a credible, independent judicial system dedicated to the primacy of the law.In that context, the Charter of the United Nations and other international legal standards must represent our universal point of reference in our efforts to achieve our shared goal of peace and justice. The principles of sovereignty, equality and respect for the national unity and territorial integrity of States must continue to guide the activities of the United Nations, including the Security Council and all the institutional mechanisms we have created to help achieve our shared goal of peace and justice.National judicial systems should continue to be the place of first resort for implementing the principle of responsibility. Primary responsibility for prosecuting the perpetrators of serious crimes affecting the international community devolves on the States, while the international community is there to help strengthen their national capacities to bring those perpetrators to trial. Nevertheless, when national systems are unable or unwilling to prosecute such international criminals, that is where the International Criminal Court comes in. According to its Statute, it is the Court’s task to help the international community to fight impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and crimes of aggression, based on the principle of complementarity.We cannot forget the valuable contribution of other mechanisms serving our shared cause of peace and justice, particularly the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which continue to play a significant role in strengthening peace and restoring the rule of law. Nor must we forget the contribution of the so-called hybrid mechanisms, which have made justice accessible to the peoples concerned, rehabilitated the legitimacy of State institutions, and strengthened national legal systems. Finally, we cannot ignore the considerable contribution that traditional judicial mechanisms have made to assuring the right to justice, truth and compensation, and to ensuring that crimes committed during a conflict will not go unpunished.In that context, we commend the Declaration of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels (resolution 67/1), held on 24 September, which recognizes that justice is an indispensable factor of sustainable peace in countries in conflict or post conflict situations. In that regard, we are pleased that transitional justice programmes have been widely integrated into United Nations work in the areas of the rule of law and of strategic planning for post-conflict situations.In a demonstration of our commitment to the international community in combating impunity for serious crimes, article 23 of Morocco’s new Constitution, adopted last year, states that genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and all serious and systematic violations of human rights are punishable by law. That commitment is part of the sweeping reforms my country has recently introduced to strengthen the rule of law and the independence of the judiciary, and we will pursue it at the international level by reinforcing our commitment to peacekeeping activities and to maintaining security under the aegis of the United Nations. I would like to thank you, Sir, for having taken the initiative of organizing this debate. It is the first time that the Security Council has devoted a meeting to the International Criminal Court (ICC). The welcome that the proposal has received is directly reflected in the large number of delegations that have decided to take part in the debate. I also thank the delegation of Guatemala for the very comprehensive concept note (S/2012/731, annex) prepared for the purpose, which raises very interesting ideas on various aspects of the functioning of the ICC. We trust that, on future occasions, the Council will return to the issue, which is of great relevance within the framework of strengthening the rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security.I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for introducing today’s topic, and Judge Sang-Hyun Song, President of the ICC, and Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, the representative of the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC, for their briefings.Colombia is a State party to the Rome Statute. As such, it has repeatedly expressed its clear support for the International Criminal Court and the cause of international criminal justice.We have addressed the crimes under the jurisdiction of the Court in our national legislation, adopted specific laws on cooperation with the Court, and were among the first countries of the western hemisphere to reach agreement with the Court on the execution of sentences. We participated actively in the Kampala Review Conference of the Rome Statute, and we are currently studying the amendments adopted there with a view to incorporating them into our legislation. We therefore ascribe the greatest importance to the holding of this debate as we mark the first 10 years of the Court’s work, as was noted by the Council during Colombia’s presidency in July.I will focus my statement on some current issues that have arisen with regard to the interaction between the Security Council and the International Criminal Court.First of all, we believe that the Council should take the greatest care when considering referrals new situations to the Court in application of the provisions of article 13 of the Rome Statute. We must recall that the possibility of triggering the court’s jurisdiction through this mechanism was enshrined in the Rome Statute in order to prevent the need to establish new ad hoc jurisdictional bodies. What the Rome Conference participants sought was to provide the Council with a viable alternative to which to turn when it has concluded that criminal trials of certain individuals at the international level would contribute to maintaining international peace and security.Naturally, my country assigns the greatest importance to the principle of complementarity, which is the very backbone of the international criminal justice system enshrined in the Rome Statute. In this regard, it is worth stressing that complementarity is called on to play a fundamental role in all cases submitted to the Court, including those referred by the Council, as was clearly demonstrated in the case of Libya and the criminal trials resulting from resolution 1970 (2011).We believe that one of the factors the Council should assess when considering the potential referral of a situation to the ICC is the existence of legal standards and institutions in the country concerned, based on which it would be possible to consider referral to the Court on the basis of complementarity.The broad powers vested in the Council under article 13 of the Statute are limited in practice because of other provisions of the Statute that seek to put into practice the principle of complementarity, as is the case with norms relating to the admissibility of cases and challenges thereto. An essential component of this mechanism is the premise that relevant decisions of the Council will be rigorously implemented if adopted under Chapter VII and after the Council had determined that there was a threat to international peace and security. Therefore, when the Court issues arrest warrants and they are not carried out, what is at stake is the credibility of the Council’s decisions and authority. It may be wort considering alternative formulations for inclusion in the particular resolution referring a given situation to the ICC.In the cases of Darfur and Libya, the solution adopted consisted of imposing two series of obligations. On the one hand, the main obligation of the stakeholders directly involved — the Government of the Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur, in the first case, and the Libyan authorities, in the second — is to cooperate with the Court and to provide the offer of the Prosecutor all necessary assistance. On the other hand, all States and regional and international organizations are called on to cooperate with the Court.Another issue related to Council referrals that has arisen recently is that of the financing of trials. The situation that has arisen on both occasions when the Council has resorted to this mechanism has led to various concerns for States parties to the Statute, which affect the application of the Relationship Agreement between the ICC and the United Nations. We believe that these concerns are valid and should be considered frankly and openly by both the Security Council and the General Assembly, as well as by the Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute.Furthermore, the alternative mechanism provided for in article 16 of the Rome Statute has been made little use of. Again, given what was decided at the plenipotentiary diplomatic conference that gave rise to the ICC, Chapter VII of the Charter must be invoked and the evaluation by the Council of the potential merit of requests for the application of this provision must involve a decision to apply Article 39 of the Charter. This should be kept in mind by those States approaching the Council to request use of the deferral procedure provided for under article 16.When a conflict situation threatens international peace and security and the Security Council is called on to act and exercise the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter of the United Nations, situations may arise in which accountability has become a necessary measure for overcoming crises and restoring international peace and security. In such situations, the Council can use the instrument of international criminal justice established in the Rome Treaty and already provided an invaluable, not only in pursuit of international justice and the fight against impunity, but also and above all in the search for international peace and security.Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to congratulate Guatemala on assuming the presidency of the Security Council this month, and to commend you for organizing such an important debate. We participate in it convinced that justice, peace and security are global public goods that deserve enhancement and protection. Their nature is complimentary, not contradictory, and their final purpose is to protect the integrity and dignity of people and to provide reparations to victims.Former Secretary-General Kofi Anan says it well in his recent memoir Interventions: A Life in War and Peace:“The choice between justice and peace is no longer an option. We must be ambitious enough to pursue both, and wise enough to recognize, respect and protect the independence of justice”.In order to fully exercise its mandate of maintaining international peace and security, the Security Council has the duty to promote the full exercise of international justice and the rule of law. That obligation is particularly important in relation to the International Criminal Court. Although the Court is an independent, treaty-based tribunal, the Statute of Rome gives the Council two prerogatives in its workings — to refer or defer cases. From that arise the right of the Council to influence the Court’s actions and the possibility for the Court to expand its jurisdictional scope.The nature of the Council is political; that of the Court is judicial. Therefore, their relation will always be complex. But for the same reason, the cooperation of the Council with the Court should be responsible and guided by a set of impartial and general principles that scrupulously respect the Court’s independence. The Council should abide by the principle that international criminal justice is not a licence for political negotiation or a means to appease despots, but a tool to fulfil an essential duty to humanity and to foster a more peaceful and safer international order, based on general rules.From that perspective, Costa Rica wishes to suggest some guidelines to the Security Council regarding its referrals to the Court. First, the Council should establish a protocol to refer to the Court any case in which there are strong indications of the perpetration of crimes defined by the Rome Statute, provided there is no action in the respective national jurisdiction. That is precisely what is happening in Syria, but the Council’s reaction has been paralysis. It is time for this situation to be referred to the International Criminal Court.Secondly, the Council should make a commitment to providing follow-up and support, including financial support, to its referrals to the Court. In the two situations referred to the Court so far, Darfur and Libya, follow-up and further cooperation have been almost non-existent.Thirdly, it should establish, in its referrals, the obligation of compliance by all States, including arrest warrants.Fourthly, it should establish subsidiary bodies to systematically ensure cooperation and follow-up.Fifthly, it should harmonize and coordinate its sanctions regimes, so that they support the orders and decisions of the Court.Sixthly, and finally, it should strengthen the mandates of peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions, so as to ensure their cooperation with the investigations and actions of the Court.In short, the Council should apply clear political will in the interest of justice, establishing standards for action, acting in accordance with them and rejecting impunity. Thus the triad of peace, security and justice will be promoted seamlessly and with consistency, for the benefit of the rule of law.The members of the Council that are signatories to the Rome Statute should take the lead in this respect. We congratulate Guatemala on its recent ratification of the instrument and for its commitment to advancing it.Mr. Errázuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the presidency of Guatemala for convening today’s meeting. Chile attaches great importance to the debate on peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of the International Criminal Court, under the agenda item “The promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the maintenance of international peace and security”.We believe that without justice there is no peace. Peace cannot exist without justice, and justice must be exercised with the objective of ensuring peace. Chile therefore considers that this debate is extremely important, as we are convinced that the relationship between the International Criminal Court and the United Nations, through the General Assembly and the Security Council, promotes the rule of law, encourages respect for human rights, and contributes towards attaining international peace and security, in accordance with international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Chile considers the International Criminal Court to be the most advanced expression of the development of international criminal justice, and that it represents one of the most important initiatives of recent times.From the perspective of protecting human rights, the creation of the Court was an important step in the fight against impunity and a clear sign that States parties are committed to the international community in making progress in that direction. For that reason, our country strongly supports the work of the International Criminal Court, and takes this opportunity to highlight the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of the Rome Statute. We also welcome the Court’s first judgment this year, which demonstrates its proper functioning.The main connection between the Security Council and the International Criminal Court resides in the capacity of the former to refer situations or to suspend investigations in accordance with articles 13 and 16 of the Rome Statute. Nevertheless, our view is that the Security Council should exercise its power to refer situations to the Court or to suspend investigations on the basis of consistent parameters, showing that its decisions are not arbitrary. We are also convinced of the need for the Security Council, in addition to supporting its own decisions on the matter, must follow up its referrals to the Court. Likewise, in respect of its referrals, the Security Council must pay special attention to refusals to cooperate with the Court.The principle of complementarity is the cornerstone of the Rome Statute, whereby it is the primary obligation of national courts to investigate, prosecute and punish the perpetrators of the most serious crimes of international scope, identified in the Rome Statute. In that regard, the Court is called upon to intervene in cases where crimes have been committed within national jurisdictions but the State concerned is unable or unwilling to carry out the respective judicial proceedings.Finally, we believe that cooperation is critical to the work of the Court. For that reason, within the framework of the High-level Meeting of the General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National and International Levels that took place on 24 September, my country, Chile, pledged to develop legislation aimed at cooperation with the International Criminal Court.